highlight/0.4.19.md, before:

This release is mostly a bug fix release. We aim for the next release to be 0.5.0, with many new exciting features!

Highlights in `v0.4.19`:

The removal of public access to `viewer.window.qt_viewer` has been postponed to `v0.6.0` ([napari/napari/#6283](https://github.com/napari/napari/pull/6283)). If you're interested in some feature that's currently behind private or deprecated API, please make an issue on the napari repo requesting the feature to be exposed!

napari is now pydantic 2 compatible. At this moment we are using `pydantic.v1` to achieve this. Additionally, for this release, the napari conda bundle will be shipped with pydantic v1, but
we expect that in the next release we will ship the bundle with pydantic v2.
Please, if you are a plugin developer and your plugin uses pydantic, ensure
that it is compatible with pydantic v2 ([napari/napari/#6358](https://github.com/napari/napari/pull/6358)).

We have fixed problems with rendering some labels in incorrect color by sequence of Pull Requests:
[napari/napari/#3308](https://github.com/napari/napari/pull/3308),
[napari/napari/#6411](https://github.com/napari/napari/pull/6411),
[napari/napari/#6467](https://github.com/napari/napari/pull/6467),
[napari/napari/#6439](https://github.com/napari/napari/pull/6439).
This also improves performance of rendering labels.
However, there are still some limitations.
Best performance is for labels encoded as (u)int8.
As GPU API accept 8 and 16 bits int textures and float textures,
for labels stored as (u)int8 and (u)int16 we could transfer data to GPU without preprocessing.

For bigger data types we need to convert data, so it leads to bigger memory usage.
Also best performance for bigger data requires to install numba library.

So if you wold like for best user performance, please try to use the minimal possible data type.
Even if, in the future, we'll use more advanced techniques for rendering labels on GPU, that will allow
transferring any data without preprocessing, the GPU often offers less VRAM that computer has RAM.
Also we experiment a little with current options and increase the size of
send data (uint8, uint16 and float32) decrease performance of rendering on GPU.
The test was performed on NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3060 with 12GB VRAM.

If you have any questions or suggestions regarding napari core, for example, on how to adapt your plugin to be compatible with future napari versions, please get in touch! We have weekly community meetings, for which you can find the schedule [here](https://napari.org/stable/community/meeting_schedule.html). We would like to hear from you.

Commit message:

Add #6102 as a feature highlight (#4)
* add 6102 as a feature highlight

* copy edits

Co-authored-by: Melissa Weber Mendonça <melissawm@gmail.com>

* fix pr link

---------

Co-authored-by: Melissa Weber Mendonça <melissawm@gmail.com>

highlight/0.4.19.md, after:

This release is mostly a bug fix release. We aim for the next release to be 0.5.0, with many new exciting features!

Highlights in `v0.4.19`:

A new feature: [napari/napari#6102](https://github.com/napari/napari/pull/6102) added convenient parsing of color names and hex color strings in layer data and generating black-to-color colormaps when adding layers to the viewer. For example, one can now use: `viewer.add_image(data, colormap="crimson")` or `viewer.add_image(data, colormap="#FAFA00")`. To see what color names can be handled, please refer to the [`vispy` dictionary of colors](https://github.com/vispy/vispy/blob/269ed1ac4d8126421fd5a7eb06a2996d63f46b17/vispy/color/_color_dict.py#L181). Note: there is a namespace collision for the case of `orange` which is both a proper `vispy` colormap name and a color name. Previously, `orange` was handled as the `vispy` colormap, which is from white to orange. However, with 0.4.19, `orange` will be handled as a color and the generated colormap will be from black to orange. 

The removal of public access to `viewer.window.qt_viewer` has been postponed to `v0.6.0` ([napari/napari/#6283](https://github.com/napari/napari/pull/6283)). If you're interested in some feature that's currently behind private or deprecated API, please make an issue on the napari repo requesting the feature to be exposed!

napari is now pydantic 2 compatible. At this moment we are using `pydantic.v1` to achieve this. Additionally, for this release, the napari conda bundle will be shipped with pydantic v1, but
we expect that in the next release we will ship the bundle with pydantic v2.
Please, if you are a plugin developer and your plugin uses pydantic, ensure
that it is compatible with pydantic v2 ([napari/napari/#6358](https://github.com/napari/napari/pull/6358)).

We have fixed problems with rendering some labels in incorrect color by sequence of Pull Requests:
[napari/napari/#3308](https://github.com/napari/napari/pull/3308),
[napari/napari/#6411](https://github.com/napari/napari/pull/6411),
[napari/napari/#6467](https://github.com/napari/napari/pull/6467),
[napari/napari/#6439](https://github.com/napari/napari/pull/6439).
This also improves performance of rendering labels.
However, there are still some limitations.
Best performance is for labels encoded as (u)int8.
As GPU API accept 8 and 16 bits int textures and float textures,
for labels stored as (u)int8 and (u)int16 we could transfer data to GPU without preprocessing.

For bigger data types we need to convert data, so it leads to bigger memory usage.
Also best performance for bigger data requires to install numba library.

So if you wold like for best user performance, please try to use the minimal possible data type.
Even if, in the future, we'll use more advanced techniques for rendering labels on GPU, that will allow
transferring any data without preprocessing, the GPU often offers less VRAM that computer has RAM.
Also we experiment a little with current options and increase the size of
send data (uint8, uint16 and float32) decrease performance of rendering on GPU.
The test was performed on NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3060 with 12GB VRAM.

If you have any questions or suggestions regarding napari core, for example, on how to adapt your plugin to be compatible with future napari versions, please get in touch! We have weekly community meetings, for which you can find the schedule [here](https://napari.org/stable/community/meeting_schedule.html). We would like to hear from you.
